
Intended Usage, License, and Citations
----------------------------------------------


The data in the X-ray Absorption Data Library have been licensed under the `Creative Commons Zero
<https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/public-domain/cc0/>` license and put in the Public
Domain. This allows anyone to use these data for any purpose, without restrictions. All claims of
exclusive copyright on these data have been relinquished in order to ensure that the broad
community of scientists, educators, and students can use these data in their studies using X-ray
absorption spectroscopy.

The people submitting data to this library agree to these terms to permit free and unrestricted
access to this data.  While exclusive ownership has been relinquished, each spectrum here will have
the name of at least one real person associated with it. This will typically be the person who
uploaded the data, or someone involved in the collection of the data.  This attribution follows
standard academic practices and allows the people who upload spectra to be recognized by their
peers for their contribution.  It also allows people to look at spectra to see who uploaded the
data.

Most of the data here will have been collected at government-operated national laboratories and/or
with government-funded research grants that may have policies about data sharing and
attribution. These policies are generally liberal and designed to promote public access to data, at
least after some time.  By uploading the data here, the submitter has agreed that submitting the
data with this license follows the guidelines of the institutions and funding agents.

If some of the XAS data here becomes an important part of your work, you may want to contact the
author or their institution or refer to there work.  Some spectra will have a literature citation
associated with them.  You are not obliged to cite such work in order to use the data, but we
encourage you to do so if those data become an important part of your work.

At this point, if you wish to cite the collection as a whole, simply use the URL
https://xaslib.xrayabsorption.org and reference the work as belonging to the `International X-ray
Absorption Society <https://xrayabsorption.org>` . We will explore generating a DOI for the
collection as a whole.
